
DCS is usually diagnosed with symptoms that appear within the first 24-48 hours of a dive of sufficient depth to cause it.   Symptoms depend on the quantity and size of nitrogen bubbles, as well as the reactions incurred by the bubble formation and the location they affect. Nitrogen bubbles are believed to start as minute gas nuclei, present before the dive, rather than from supersaturation of the blood and tissues that acts as the seed for large bubble formation.  Bubbles alter vascular endothelium and result in focal ischemia and the potential for local coagulation and thrombosis via a foreign body mechanism that results in platelet accumulation. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase produces nitric oxide through the combination of arginine and oxygen. It is a powerful vasodilator which, through relaxation of smooth muscles, inhibits platelet aggregation and inhibits inflammation.  NO is increased by increasing partial pressures of oxygen.

DCS results from the effects of these bubbles on organ systems. The bubbles may disrupt cells and cause a loss of function. They may act as emboli and block circulation, as well as cause mechanical compression and stretching of the blood vessels and nerves. The blood-bubble interface may act as a foreign surface, activating the early phases of blood coagulation and the release of vasoactive substances from the cells lining the blood vessels. DCS may be divided into 3 categories: (1) type I (mild), (2) type II (serious), and (3) arterial gas embolization (AGE).

Type I decompression sickness
Type I DCS is characterized by one or a combination of the following: (1) mild pains that begin to resolve within 10 minutes of onset (niggles); (2) pruritus, or "skin bends," that causes itching or burning sensations of the skin; and (3) cutis marmorata, a skin rash which generally is widespread mottling and/or marbling of the skin, or a papular or plaque-like violaceous rash. On rare occasions, skin has an orange-peel appearance. Cutis marmorata typically starts as an intense multifocal itching, then hyperemia develops, followed by the already described purplish rash.

Pain (the bends) occurs in most (70-85%) patients with type I DCS. Pain is the most common symptom of this mild type of DCS and is often described as a dull, deep, throbbing, toothache-type pain, usually in a joint or tendon area but also in tissue. The shoulder is the most commonly affected joint. The pain is initially mild and slowly becomes more intense. Because of this, many divers attribute early DCS symptoms to overexertion or a pulled muscle.

Muscle splinting causes decreased function. Upper limbs are affected about 3 times as often as lower limbs. The pain caused by type I DCS may mask neurologic signs that are hallmarks of the more serious type II DCS. Dysbaric osteonecrosis is a phenomenon that occurs in divers with high numbers of dives. This is a persistent problem, suggesting that the mechanisms involved in the disorder are not yet understood.

Type II decompression sickness
Type II DCS is characterized by the following: (1) pulmonary symptoms, (2) hypovolemic shock, or (3) nervous system involvement. Pain is reported in only about 30% of cases. Because of the anatomic complexity of the central and peripheral nervous systems, signs and symptoms are variable and diverse. Symptom onset is usually immediate but may be delayed as long as 36 hours.

The spinal cord is the most common site affected by type II DCS; symptoms mimic spinal cord trauma. Low back pain may start within a few minutes to hours after the dive and may progress to paresis, paralysis, paresthesia, loss of sphincter control, and girdle pain of the lower trunk. Patients with the worst outcomes (still having multiple neurological sequelae with less than 50% resolution after hyperbaric oxygen therapy) were those who had onset of symptoms within 30 minutes of surfacing.

Dysbaric myelitis occurs in half of the cases of neurological DCS. Venous ischemia is the most likely cause. Bladder problems, such as neurogenic bladder, may be common in the acute phase of DCS, may be the primary presentation, and may be prolonged.

Differentiating cerebral AGE from type II neurologic DCS is usually based on the suddenness of symptoms. AGE symptoms typically occur within 10-20 minutes after surfacing. Multiple systems may be involved. Clinical features may occur suddenly or gradually, beginning with dizziness, headache, and profound anxiousness. More severe symptoms, such as unresponsiveness, shock, and seizures, can quickly occur. Neurologic symptoms vary, and death can result. DCS of the CNS is clinically similar to AGE.